This is part II of the brain dump I started in a [previous post](https://hritikjain.com/growth/2024/08/18/immigration-part-one.html), and by the end of it I hope to make peace with a way forward with the immigration journey that lies ahead. Because broader life is a melting pot of a variety of unforeseeable events and personal experiences, this analysis that's intended to be prescriptive is but speculative. With that said, it's helpful to resume with some facts and likely possibilities. For the next two years, it's highly unlikely that I will be back in the US. The only way that can happen is if I get picked in the H1B lottery. If I change employers in Canada before March next year, they will mostly not even apply for the H1B unless we strike some explicit agreement or if it's, say, a US-based startup that views Canadian employment as temporary to begin with. In any case, the whole H1B situation has taken a major toll on my peace of mind, so I've decided to let it go. It's for the best. With that out of the way, the next question is do I get anything by being in Canada in the next two years? Yes: PR - Canadian equivalent of the US green card. But is there any advantage from getting a Canadian PR? To answer that, it's helpful to look at the alternative. And that would be the L1B VISA. With my current employer I can be back in New York by August next year, and nostalgia make that very lucrative. But I'm not very eager, at least for now, to return on L1B and be tied to my current employer for several years. **If this route is possible with my next role, I might strongly consider it.**  But finding that role role in Canada is quite challenging. The number of openings in US companies at Canada office locations in general is a very small fraction of the number in the US, and the fraction of US companies hiring in Canada itself is small. Now on top of that, there are additional filters on what is worth pursuing when I consider the long term trajectory of my career. Before we get to that, let's step back a bit and revisit the point of it all, if there is one.
Like a lot of people of my demographics, I fancy having the wealth to not have to rent out my time to sustain my and my closed ones' lives. That will birth the sweet freedom to work on exciting ideas or empower those of others through leverage. I am quite convinced that US is the place with opportunities to build such a life, and having a permanent resident status there is the only way to pursue this in the long term. Now the big dilemma I want to get to the bottom of and dissolve, by writing down my cluttered thoughts around it as part of this post, is whether or not there is an intersection point in the future where the long term path to be pursued (if at all) to get the US green card meets the path that emerges by pursuing the most rewarding/fulfilling near-term endeavors in my career. And that could in turn help me decide what's the cost I'm willing to pay to hang on to the possibility of building a life in the US. Above all, my priority is to make sure whatever I'm doing is not a mere means to an end. The journey has to be organic and greatly fulfilling in its own right. Because if not, the opportunity cost is a man's thirties. So it's an absolute requirement that ride be fun, because there's just one.
