This is part II of the brain dump I started in a previous post to help me make peace with the immigration journey that lies ahead. Because broader life is a melting pot of a variety of unforeseeable events and personal experiences, this analysis that's intended to be prescriptive is but speculative. With that said, it's helpful to resume with some facts and likely possibilities. For the next two years, it's highly unlikely that I will be back in the US. The only way that can happen is if I get picked in the H1B lottery. If I change employers in Canada before March next year, they will mostly not even apply for the H1B unless we strike some explicit agreement or if it's, say, a US-based startup that views Canadian employment as temporary to begin with. In any case, the whole H1B situation has taken a major toll on my peace of mind, so I've decided to let it go. It's for the best. With that out of the way, the next question is do I get anything by being in Canada in the next two years? Yes: PR - Canadian equivalent of the US green card. But is there any advantage from getting a Canadian PR? To answer that, it's helpful to look at the alternative. And that would be the L1B VISA. With my current employer I can be back in New York by August next year, and nostalgia make that very lucrative. But I'm not very eager, at least for now, to return on L1B and be tied to my current employer for several years. If this route is possible with my next role, I might strongly consider it. But finding that role role in Canada is quite challenging. The number of openings in US companies at Canada office locations in general is a very small fraction of the number in the US, and the fraction of US companies hiring in Canada itself is small. Now on top of that, there are additional filters on what is worth pursuing when I consider the long term trajectory of my career. Before we get to that, i think useful to step back a bit and revisit the point of it all, at least from where I stand.

Like a lot of people of my demographics, I fancy having the wealth to not have to rent out my time to sustain my and my closed ones' lives. That will birth the sweet freedom to work on exciting ideas or empower those of others through leverage. I am quite convinced that US is the place with opportunities to build such a life, and having a permanent resident status there is the only way to pursue this in the long term. Now the big dilemma I want to get to the bottom of and dissolve, by writing down my cluttered thoughts around it as part of this post, is whether or not there is an intersection point in the future where the long term path to be pursued (if at all) to get the US green card meets the path that emerges by pursuing the most rewarding/fulfilling near-term endeavors in my career. And that could in turn help me decide what's the cost I'm willing to pay to hang on to the possibility of building a life in the US. Above all, my priority is to make sure whatever I'm doing is not a mere means to an end. The journey has to be organic and greatly fulfilling in its own right. Because if not, the opportunity cost is a man's thirties. So it's an absolute requirement that ride be fun, because there's just one.

Alright, I can think of a couple routes that can lead to the US green card. If any of these work out ideally, I could get it in as soon five-six years from now, and believe me, that's short for for an Indian/Chinese immigrant. But I have to be all-in on whichever I chose to pursue. If I'm simultaneously making progress on multiple paths at once, that's amazing. But I know that getting to the finish line will most likely take longer than I think and it will test my perseverance way harder than I can imagine. The paths are as follows:

a) Get into a managerial position, and spend at least a year out of the US in this role. Assuming my then employer supports my move to an US office, I am eligible to come back on an L1A VISA, and apply for the EB1C green card. Becoming a manager could take at least two to three years from now, and it would be another year to move to the US. From my limited understanding about the entities involved in a green card application - the PERM process, priority dates, I140, I1485 - it'll take about three-five more years once I'm in the US on L1A to get the EB1C green card processed as an Indian-born. I not sure if I can change employers during that time. I should find out the answers to these questions. I should also check with my current employer if any of the processes involved can be started today by any chance. Anyway, this is the more doable of all the possible paths I can lay out for myself, but it scores lowest in terms of the journey's appeal.

b) Establish myself, in the eyes of the USCIS, as an individual of extraordinary ability and bag the O1-A VISA. O1 VISA doesn't require sponsorship from an employer, which is a great feature. It also does not guarantee a green card, not in and of itself. But from what I've heard, it serves as a great stepping stone to the highly coveted EB1-A green card, aka the Einstein VISA. The criteria to qualify for both is similar, with EB1-A having stricter standards. I know that to qualify for O1-A one needs to satisfy three out of eight criteria, and that doing well at my day job can get me two of three. The third I believe has to do with having a public record of expertise in a specific field through authorship in online publications, and instances like judging competitions, etc. To actually build that profile, I will need a lot of guidance, and more importantly a company more conducive to putting out industry leading work through publications or talks in conferences. It's clear that a research team in a Big Tech company would best match that description, but without a PhD getting in from the outside is close to impossible. I imagine I will first need to join, in my current capacity of an ML Engineer, any business or product focused team in one of these companies - where non-PhD engineers and scientists are known to have co-authored published papers. Off the bat I can think of some of the research groups at FAANG companies - Facebook AI Research (FAIR), Google Research, Amazon Science, and Microsoft Research, etc. The real challenge would be to then get into the research group at that company. I have no inkling if there is a paved path there, and how long does that take.
I believe a stronger bet for me is to land a role in my current domain, i.e. information retrieval, search ranking, and recommendation systems, with better than present prospects of publishing work. My homework here would be a) dig into the archives of the top conferences in this field, such as KDD, RecSys, SIGIR, etc and locate the publications' authors, and through that b) compile a list of my target companies. Consumer tech companies like Airbnb, Uber, Spotify immediately come to my mind as the top places. But at this point at least, I don't see them hiring in Canada at all. But this surfaces another conundrum - what to do about the ML opportunities that knock at my door, but are outside of this specific domain. That's a factor since for O1-A and EB1-A, one needs to demonstrate leading expertise in a specific area. Although I haven't published anything in the Search and Recommendations ML domain, but I may have just found my groove there. So I'm somewhat biased to continue in this area. It might be worthwhile to get some advice on how to navigate this.

So that would be the O1-A, EB1-A road. I recall some encouraging words that Soundarya Balasubramani, who runs the Unshackled community, said to me about pursuing this route, "Getting the O1 VISA is not a matter of if, but when". This can be the fastest route to a green card for Asian immigrants like me if everything works out favorably - maybe two years to build a strong profile for the O1, and another two to get it up to the EB1-A mark and have the green card processed. The journey to accumulating that credibility can be quite fulfilling if one is genuinely immersed in their niche.

c) There's a second way to obtain the O1-A VISA, and that is having founded a funded, or at least a validated startup. Like I mentioned previously, working on my own thing is indeed what I desire to do in the long term. As a contingency plan for the green card though, with not even a business idea in my head today, and with little to no confidence in my abilities to lead a founding team anytime soon, this path is not really a realistic option to rely on. Purely from an immigration perspective, whenever I set out on this path, the true outcomes will be not be realized until at least 3-5 years down the road, if ever at all. Qualifying for the O1 VISA as a founder with enough evidence is no less unpredictable. Instead, I believe the credibility and experience I'll gain from producing a) or b) will prove to be a more robust foundation for building something from scratch. But what's more important is that in the meantime I keep expanding my network and stay on the lookout for any opportunities to join the promising founding team. I can't imagine a better training ground to become a co-founder.